---
icon: pen-to-square
date: 2024-03-31
category:
  - science
tag:
  - physics
  - electrodynamics
  - simulation
---

# The-magneto-scalar-field and its role

<!-- more -->

## Abstract

In the early 2000s, there was a minor flare-up in the history of physics due to the article by C. Monstein and J.P. Wesley (Monstein & Wesley, 2002), when they claimed to have experimentally supported the existence of longitudinal electromagnetic waves. Around this time, the first alternative electrodynamics was born with the help of quaternions (van Vlaenderen & Waser, 2001). Later, following K. Rębilas (Rębilas, 2008), it turned out that the experimental results can be explained within the framework of classical electrodynamics. The principle of conservation of charge was supported by many experiments. The experiments were characterized by a long observation time, which means that the processes could have been averaged. The question may arise, if we repeat the measurements on the same system at sufficiently short intervals, will we experience fluctuations in the total amount of charge in a closed system? For some condensed matter systems, admitting discontinuities in the probability current is the cause of the violation of local conservation. This leads us to ask a logical theoretical question: how should one compute the electromagnetic field of a microscopic current that is not locally conserved? In such cases, the Aharonov-Bohm theory offers a logically consistent approach.

The laws of the theory of electrodynamics were formulated in quaternion form. Formalism shows that Maxwell's equations can be derived from only a single quaternion equation. I distinguish between modified and unmodified Maxwell equations according to whether or not the Lorenz gauge is applied. I present the shape of the quaternion as the continuity equation, generalizing the “traditional” continuity equation with three equations. A magneto scalar field set in equations that propagates at the speed of light. I lay the ground pillars of the static magneto scalar field. I also deal with magneto scalar waves, the energy conservation, the constitutive relations in vacuum, the invariance to the Lorentz transformation, the Lagrangian density and some other topics.

## Link

<https://github.com/physx-is-fun/The-magneto-scalar-field>

## Bibliography

Monstein, C., & Wesley, J. P. (2002). Observation of scalar longitudinal electrodynamic waves. Europhysics Letters, 514–520.

Rębilas, K. (2008). On the origin of "longitudinal electrodynamic waves". Europhysics Letters, 60007(1–5).

van Vlaenderen, K., & Waser, A. (2001). Generalisation of classical electrodynamics to admit a scalar field and longitudinal waves. Hadronic Journal, 24, 609.