---
icon: pen-to-square
date: 2024-03-31
category:
  - science
tag:
  - physics
  - laser
  - ruby
---

# Theoretical foundations of the diode laser pumped cw ruby ​​laser

<!-- more -->

## Abstract

In some recently published articles: (Krupke & Zweiback, 2020); (Luhs & Wellegehausen, Diode pumped cw ruby ​​laser, 2019); (Luhs, Wellegehausen, Zuber, & Morgner, 2021) reported on the operation of cw mode ruby ​​lasers pumped with 405 nm laser diodes. Based on the above, since the construction of the first laser more than 60 years ago (Maiman T.H., 1960), both flash lamp pumped and diode laser pumped cw lasers are still considered as exciting tools in metrology applications. In this study, we can learn how a ruby ​​laser pumped with a diode laser is built in cw operation. The type of resonator selected is hemispherical, which is easy to handle and insensitive to displacement. Because of this, at the same time, transverse modes (mainly TEM00) may develop. The selected mode is cw, i.e. continuous. This study assumes knowledge of the basics of optics and atomic physics. The introduction to each chapter mostly only requires knowledge of algebra, otherwise we expect knowledge of the basics of differential and integral calculus. Its purpose is to familiarize the Reader with the basics of the field of laser physics. This study deals with the digital curriculum (Almási, et al., 2013).

## Link

<https://github.com/physx-is-fun/Ruby-laser>

## Bibliography

Almási, G., Erdélyi, M., Fülöp, A. J., Hebling, J., Horváth, Z., Kovács, P. A., . . . Smausz, T. K. (2013). Lézerfizika - elektronikus tananyag. Retrieved from https://eta.bibl.u-szeged.hu/1711/2/lezerfizika/titan.physx.u-szeged.hu/_bubo/Lezerfizika/book.html

Krupke, W., & Zweiback, J. (2020). High efficiency gallium nitride diode pumped cw ruby laser. In W. A. Clarkson, & R. K. Shori (Ed.), Solid State Lasers XXIX: Technology and Devices, 11259.

Luhs, W., & Wellegehausen, B. (2019). Diode pumped cw ruby laser. OSA Continuum, 2(1), 184-191.

Luhs, W., Wellegehausen, B., Zuber, D., & Morgner, U. (2021). Maiman revisited: tuneable single mode cw ruby ring laser. Journal of Physics Communications, 5(8).

Maiman, T. H. (1960). Stimulated optical radiation in ruby. Nature, 187(4736), 493-494.